Hey, it's Natalie. Taking a quick second
here because we here at the Daily are
working on a fun little project.
Something that we'll share later as a
special bonus episode for New York Times
subscribers. The idea is simple. We're
going to be talking to our fascinating
colleagues here at the New York Times
about who they are and how they do their
jobs. And as a part of that project, we
want to hear from you. What's the one
question you've had for our colleagues
but never gotten the chance to ask? We
started with games and now we're going
to go to the Times restaurant critics,
Tel Ralph and Lega Michon. They're both
new to the job and they've brought a lot
of exciting changes. One is in
California, the other one's in New York
City. They're no longer dining
anonymously and they're reviewing
restaurants all over the country. I
personally have a ton of questions for
them, like how are they going to get
fair service from restaurants? How do
they know they're not getting treated
differently than us regular folks? How
do they pick where to go? And also, most
importantly, what's their most
controversial food take? Get us your
questions, please, by leaving a message
at 2125564000.
Again, that's 2125564000.
Okay, here's the show.
From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the Daily. The world's
biggest museum, a symbol of France, now
a crime scene.
>> Over the weekend, a group of thieves
staged a remarkable heist at one of the
world's most famous museums. Officials
in Paris say the masked crooks used a
basket lift and cutting tools to just
break into a gallery,
>> stealing some of the most precious and
culturally significant jewels in Europe
in the middle of Paris in broad
daylight.
>> It's like a scene from a film.
>> Yeah. You could not make it up. I
thought it was a joke, like no, not
possible.
>> As new details emerge about the brazen
theft at the Louvre, the response in
France has been a mix of shock,
disbelief, and fascination.
>> This is the heist of the decade. You
know, it's as bad as it gets.
>> How could the world's most visited
museum be robbed with such brazen
audacity? Today, my colleague Katherine
Porter explains how the robbery happened
and why so many feel as though they may
have just lost a piece of their history
for good.
[Music]
It's Wednesday, October 22nd.
>> Catherine, hi.
>> How are you? This is probably the only
taping where I've literally been like, I
need us to begin so I can ask my
questions right now.
I mean, that's not true. It's not the
only one, but this is a very special
episode and I need to talk to you about
this story. I have read everything about
this heist and I'm not satisfied still.
>> I am I am ready for you.
>> Okay, good. Just to start, tell me
exactly how a group of jewel thieves
broke into the Louve and stole these
very precious items. Just start from the
beginning. Tell me exactly what
happened. As far as we know,
>> as far as we know, this started at 9:30
last Sunday morning.
Typical kind of quiet Paris morning. And
what we know is this truck that had a
ladder attached to it rolls up to the
Louv with two motorcycles.
Now you might wonder why is there a
truck with a ladder on it, but in Paris
it's pretty common sight cuz this is how
you move your furniture in and out of
your apartments because of how skinny
the halls are. M.
>> So, um, it rolls up, parks right up
against the building on the sidewalk and
two people pop out and they set out
traffic pylons around the truck and they
have fluorescent vests on like public
workers do.
>> So, like anybody looking at this from
the outside might think this is a
completely normal scene. Nothing to see
here. Nothing necessarily to see except
for the two men that then went up this
electric ladder to the balcony on the
second floor were masked.
So that might have tipped you off if you
were there. But to be honest, this is
the quiet side of the Louv. It's near
the Sen. Not a lot of foot traffic. So
they go up the uh mechanical elevator in
a kind of bucket, like a cherry picker.
They get to this balcony onto the second
floor of the Louve and they use what are
known as angle grinders,
>> which is what exactly?
>> Kind of like a electric hand saw.
>> Okay.
>> To saw through the window that leads
into what's known as the Apollo gallery.
It's this golden long beautiful
uh wing of the Louve that literally was
built by Louis the 14th as a model for
his hall of mirrors and it houses the
royal jewels of France.
Is this like a very popular part of the
Lou? It certainly sounds as though it's
iconic.
super iconic. It's not as popular
obviously as the Mona Lisa,
>> but it's pretty close. You know, when
you go in there, it's often quite
crowded. It's really opulent. There's
paintings on the ceilings, on the walls
by famous people like Deloqua. There are
hanging tapestries. There are um
sculptures and these cases down the
middle that hold the crown jewels. the
the thieves break in using this saw. We
hear from people who work in the Louve
that there was an explosion of glass and
there were a number of security guards
inside who really quickly evacuated the
room.
>> So, they didn't approach the thieves.
>> No. The protocol in the Louvre and most
museums is if you are confronted with an
intruder that had things that seem like
they could be weapons, your priority is
protect people. So they did what they
were instructed to do, what they've been
trained to do. They got people out and
very, very quickly. And how many people
were there at the time? I mean, 9:30
a.m. on a Sunday does not seem like the
ideal time to rob the most famous museum
in the world. Was it crowded? Well, we
don't know how many people were in that
room. That's like one of the details
that has not surfaced yet or been
disclosed by investigators. We do know
that the Louv is like the most visited
museum in the world. Up to 30,000 people
visit every day. We've seen videos and
spoken to people who were quite frantic
not knowing why they were being
evacuated. Many were running to get out.
I mean, there was huge fear at first
that either there was a fire or this was
a terrorist attack.
>> So, the thieves are inside. What happens
next?
>> What we know is that they go like
directly to two cases that are in the
middle of the line of cases and they use
their power saws to cut into them and
break them open.
>> I had heard there was some video footage
taken of the thieves stealing the
pieces. Do we know anything about how
they were acting, what they were doing,
their general demeanor at the time?
>> Yeah, we've seen those videos. They were
given, I guess, to a local French TV
station. They're quite blurry, but you
see clearly one of the two men wearing
something over his head, like a black
covering on his head. He's got his
yellow vest on, and he's just he looks
incredibly calm, like there's no
franticness. He's just sawing away. You
know what we have been told by the chief
Paris prosecutor who is in charge of
leading the investigation into this is
that these are seasoned. They think that
they're part of a gang. They clearly
knew what they were coming for. They
were pretty precise and fast and they
didn't seem panicked at all. But all
this was, you know, fairly quick.
>> Our timeline shows that they arrived
outside the building at 9:30. They got
up to that window on the top of the
mechanical ladder. Four minutes later,
they broke in and they were out within
four minutes and down and gone. So, um,
>> amazing.
>> That's pretty fast. I mean, I know in
terms of heists, it's not the fastest.
There have many faster. People who study
this stuff say it's not crazy fast, but
it was fast enough that they escaped and
uh, they have not been found. So, okay,
let's talk about that escape. I'm trying
to imagine it. What does it actually
look like?
>> You know, they jump out the window that
they came in. They go down the same
bucket um ladder to the bottom. We
understand also that they at this point
attempt to um set fire to the truck to
the bucket itself. We don't know why.
There's been lots of speculation they
were trying to remove any kind of DNA or
fingerprints basically. And at this
point, what we know is that some
security guard or guards come chasing
towards them on the ground. They drop a
couple things, including one of their
security vests and the bottle that they
were using to spray gas onto the this
cherry bin to light it on fire. and they
jump on the back of two waiting
motorcycles and speed away.
One, you know, very juicy detail is that
they dropped one of the nine things they
originally grabbed. I read that
>> and it was this incredibly precious
crown, an imperial crown that was made
for the last empress of France who was
married to Napoleon III. I can tell you
a little bit about it. I have been
learning a ton about these type of
things.
>> You're like the world's expert in crown
jewels now.
>> Well, not before this, but I have become
one. Hold on. So, this crown had eight
golden eagles on it. 1,354
regular diamonds and then 1,136
rose cut diamonds as well as 56 pretty
sizable emeralds. Okay, so they dropped
this crown, but they did manage to get
eight items. Take me through what those
were. What were some of the biggest
gets?
So, um, you know, again, my crash course
on learning about royal jewelry, a lot
of these items stem from either Napoleon
III or Napoleon himself. So, I'll take
you through a couple. There was this
incredible emerald necklace and earring
set that Napoleon gave to his second
wife for their wedding in 1810.
>> Wow.
>> So, that's just one. Then there's this
decorative bow that was worn by Empress
Eugenei that has two thou more than
2,000 diamonds.
>> Oh my god, I saw a picture of that one.
I was like hard to look at. It was so
shiny even just in the pictures, you
know.
And there's like a pearl um kind of tiar
that's also incredibly jaw-dropping. But
Natalie, one thing that points to that
these thieves
knew what they were doing is they didn't
go for what was really the most
expensive item. In those cases, they
went for these items. And there's a lots
of discussion about, you know, maybe
they thought these ones would be easier
to break down and easier to um smelled
and break apart and sell in small
pieces. But you know among those cases
is this incredible diamond that's known
as the regent
>> that was bought by the Duke of Orlon in
like the early 1700s and was on the
centerpiece of Louis X the 15th's crown
and then later was on Napoleon's sword
on Louis V 16th's crown
>> and it's like the size of a plum.
>> Wow. But lots of jewelry experts say it
would be just far too easy to identify
and really hard to pawn off.
>> So we have a sense that this is more of
a commodity grab than an attempt to get
beautiful heritage pieces for some kind
of kooky specialist collector who wants
to hold things alone in a vault. Right?
>> And so if you're going for commodities,
you're looking for things that can be
quickly disassembled and sold in small
pieces.
>> Right? These are thieves. The idea is
who are looking to sell these things and
make money, not, you know, mount them in
their homes. I can imagine it's a lot
easier, right, to sell a single diamond
than a distinctive necklace, for
example.
>> Right. Well, you can't sell that
distinctive necklace because it's
already been traced. You know, like
Interpol has put it on its list. You
would get caught very, very quickly. But
the idea of what experts are telling us
is is that you would break it down into
small pieces, maybe carve some of the
larger stones into smaller stones so
they're less identifiable.
>> You know, one expert says you string
them into a different kind of necklace
and sell it and pawn it off that way.
But certainly if you try and auction
anything off, people will be on the
alert looking for these things. Can I
ask, you know, everybody's been talking
about these crown jewels as priceless,
but obviously there is a price that you
can attach to these things, right? Do we
know what was the worth of the things
they stole? Yeah, we just found out. Up
until now, there's been lots of
speculation about how much they might
have escaped with, but the head of the
investigation just went on public radio
literally minutes ago and said that the
estimation they have is they are worth
88 million.
>> WA,
>> which is a ton. But she also said this
interesting thing. She said, "Look, you
know, if you were to break them apart
and melt them down, they'd be worth a
lot less." in some ways almost
beseeching to the the thieves like
please don't do this you know you're not
going to make as much money as is as how
uh we read it in in the office
>> for what purpose do you think out of a
desire to keep these precious items
intact?
>> Yeah. I mean, even if they're worth 88
million euros, I think to the country of
France and
the history of the country, they're
worth a ton more.
Historically, symbolically, culturally,
these things are priceless.
>> And so, I think in some ways, a lot of
people have been talking about, you
know, how much they'd be worth, but
really the loss is more emotional for
the country than I think it is
financial.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So, I want to ask just about the
reaction to some of this. If the
assumption is that these thieves are
going to break these things down, maybe
melt down the gold, sell it for parts,
make as much money as possible, how are
French people responding to that
possibility? It is the history of this
country that could be disappeared.
I think the predominant reaction has
been shock and not that at the idea of
these things being melted down per se,
but just at the whole like what happened
on Sunday morning. The fact that these
people could that easily get into the
Louv has caused, you know, a lot of
different kinds of emotional reactions.
There's been anger. People are stunned.
Some people are quite emotional about
it. the country's justice minister. He
said that this is certain sign of a
failure. We have failed. It has been
politicized. There's been people
particularly on the right wing of the
spectrum blaming the government for not
putting enough money into security.
There's been questions about what is the
the security of the lou. And there's
just been sort of people bemoning the
fact that this could happen in the
center of the city in the the most
famous, most visited, most coveted, most
protected museum in France and likely
the world.
>> Right. The reaction that you're
describing sounds like it's one of a
sense of self questioning that's
happening because of just how highly
traffic this area was. How could this
possibly occur? Right. Yeah. There's
that sense and also just the sense of
tragedy. This country watched the NRAAM
almost burn down and people lined the
banks of the Sen with tears in their
eyes. You know, many of them kneeling
watching it. I think French people
living here, they are
very critical culturally. They're people
who like to strike. They like to
complain. They're pretty critical,
>> but they love their history. If you go
into a French bookstore, like one out of
every four books is a history book.
People know their history. They visit
the museums. This is like a a very
important cultural place in in French
people's hearts. And
>> I think people are appalled, shocked,
and really grieving to a degree. The
thing that's really interesting is that,
you know, France doesn't actually have a
huge amount of royal
jewels like this because of the
revolution.
>> Explain that.
>> And so, you know, the revolution which
ended in the beheading of the king and
queen at the time. At that time, the the
Louv was sacked. A lot of things were
stolen, including some of the jewels.
But then, you know, France has a really
ambivalent relationship with its royal
history. It's a very proud republic. And
during one of those republics, they
decided that they were going to take
what was left of the royal jewels and
auction them off. And that's what they
did in the late 1800s. They auctioned
off tons of these jewels. And
incredibly, the lion share of them were
bought by an American who was a founder
of Tiffany's.
>> Oh, wow. So, um, you know, the the Lou
has been spending decades now trying to
get them back.
>> In reading about this story, I learned
that this is one of several thefts from
French museums this year. Can you tell
me about some of those other episodes?
Like, what is going on?
>> Yeah, even this week there was a small
museum that was burgled twice in a row
and we were looking at like, should we
do a story on this? So, it was funny
that when this happened, I was like, "Oh
my god." But yeah, last month someone
went into the natural history museum,
which is only a couple subway stops away
from the Louv, and using kind of similar
tools, cut into some cases and took out
a bunch of molten raw gold and made off
with them. In the same month, last
month, a museum down in Limoge,
southwest of Paris, thieves broke into a
museum and stole some ancient China. In
November of last year, thieves using
bats went in during the day also to a
quite famous museum not far away from
where I'm sitting.
>> So, you know, there's definitely a
streak of these right now, right,
>> in France. Is there an understanding
that these robberies are connected in
any way? I mean, I'm just wondering, it
does feel like it's out of another era
that you have this string of museum
robberies, you know, and I'm wondering
if the thieves either are in any way
working together, even loosely, or are
targeting the museums for similar
reasons.
>> There's no indication that people are
working together. Yes, this seems very
old-fashioned, except for in one way.
This happened in broad daylight, you
know, when people were in the museum,
right?
>> And that's pretty new. There's a modern
art museum here that was famously
burgled in the middle of the night and a
man made off with five very famous
tableau. And he did it in a classic way
like when you're thinking about the
movie in your head, which here is known
as Lup. It's a very famous series. If
you haven't seen it, definitely watch
it.
>> I've seen it. Yeah. I I feel like I'm
watching it in real life right now. But,
you know, like it's it's secret.
>> Yeah.
>> And often that's at night or in some way
that people don't see it happening. This
is like a very brazen in that we do know
that, you know, there's CCTV cameras all
around the Louv. There were people there
even. So, it's a little bit different.
And the lead investigator is talking
about this being like incredibly
organized. She doesn't think there was
just four people. She thinks that
there's many more involved in this. So,
we don't know anything about these four
guys who broke into the Lou, though. So,
you know, it's hard to say um what kind
of connections, but clearly they're
either copycatting or there's some ring
that's sponsoring them. Those are
questions that, you know, we hope to be
able to answer in the weeks to come.
>> What are the next steps in the
investigation? Like, what are the
investigators telling you about the
manhunt for these guys, about their
investigative strategies? Do we know how
they're going about trying to catch
them?
>> No. What we do know is that there were
60 police investigators on the case.
Now, we know it's up to 100. We know
that they've been using DNA methods,
fingerprinting. They've been using
surveillance cameras. We know that the
truck was left behind.
>> Yeah. They didn't manage to burn it.
>> They didn't manage to burn it. We know
that they had just recently basically
stolen it. And so investigators are
speaking to the person they stole it
from. But that's the gist of what we've
been told by investigators. They are
being incredibly tight- lipped about it
at this point. I think they will speak
more once and if they find them. But
there's a real feeling that there's a
race against time to try and get them
before these precious jewels are broken
apart and secreted away.
My final question for you, Catherine, is
do you think it's possible? And it
sounds like it might be that these
thieves actually pulled this off, like
that they could get away with it.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think it's possible that
we will never see those jewels again,
[Music]
but I think France has a pretty good
record of capturing some of these
people. In fact, the person who is said
to have broken into the Natural History
Museum was just charged today. She was
captured in Barcelona. I think given the
amount of cameras um and evidence that
the cops have that they will be able to
trace who these men were.
If someone tries to sell, you know, that
beautiful diamond bow that we were
talking about earlier, then no doubt
they'll get caught and it will be
returned. And that is the best case
scenario. But if they take each of those
thousand plus diamonds off and make
something entirely different out of it,
maybe a tiara, I don't know, an anklet,
a bracelet for a very rich person, then
who would notice at first? You would
need to be an expert to be able to trace
those diamonds to that bow. So, it seems
much less likely
in this case that these beautiful pieces
of French heritage will make their way
back.
[Music]
Catherine, thanks so much.
>> You're welcome, Natalie. It was such a
pleasure to be talking to you.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know. Today
>> we are one week into President Trump's
historic peace plan in the Middle East
and things are going frankly better than
I expected that they were. On Tuesday,
Vice President JD Vance traveled to
Israel as the US seeks to shore up the
fragile ceasefire deal in Gaza, which
has come under strain with repeated
flare-ups of violence in recent days.
Vance didn't give a deadline for Hamas
to disarm, a key part of that truce
agreement, and he also didn't specify
how officials would make sure the group
agrees to do so.
>> We've got a lot of work left to do. This
is going to take a very, very long time.
>> The vice president did express optimism
that the deal would hold, but said the
process of securing long-term peace
would take time.
And a White House official said on
Tuesday that Trump had no plans to meet
with Russian President Vladimir Putin in
the immediate future. A pivot after
Trump had suggested last week that he
would meet with the Russian leader soon
to discuss an end to the war in Ukraine.
Speaking to reporters, Trump said he
wanted to avoid a quote wasted meeting
with Putin.
White House press secretary Caroline
Levit said that after Trump had a call
with Putin last week, the Russian leader
had committed to sitting down with him.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Shannon
Lynn and Caitlyn O'Keefe. It was edited
by Brendan Clinkenberg, fact checked by
Susan Lee, contains music by Dan Powell,
Pat McCusker, and Marian Lozano, and was
engineered by Chris Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See you tomorrow.
[Music]